>> ON THIS EDITION FOR SAT
MAY 31st, A U.S. SOLDIER HELD BY
THE TALIBAN SINCE 2009 I
RELEASED
>>> DEFENSE SECRETARY HAGE
WARNS THE UNITED STATES WILL NOT
LOOK THE OTHER WAY OVER CHINA'
TERRITORIAL CLAIMS
>>> AND THE MINDS OF KILLERS
NEXT ON PBS "NEWS HOUR WEEKEND."
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK
>> GOOD EVENING.
SERGEANT BOWE BERGDAHL, THE
THE ONLY AMERICAN PRISONER BEING
HELD IN AFGHANISTAN WAS RELEASED
EARLIER TODAY, IN EXCHANGE FOR
FOR FIVE PRISONERS BEING HELD
AT GUANTANMO BAY IN CUBA.
THIS EVENING THE PRESIDENT
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
ROSE GARDEN. HE WAS JOINED BY
THE SGT’S PARENTS.
ADDRESSED THE COUNTRY FROM THE
TO BRING OUR PRISONER’S HOME"
THE 28 YR OLD SGT. WAS CAPTURED
IN 2009. AND WAS TURNED OVER TO
NEAR THE PAKISTANI BORDER
"WE MADE AN IRONCLAD COMMITMEN
EARLIER I SPOKE WITH ADAM ENTIS.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT BOWE
BERGDAHL'S CONDITION RIGHT NOW
>> RIGHT
WE'VE BEEN TOLD BY AMERICA
OFFICIALS THAT HE'S WALKING ON
HIS OWN.
HE'S IN GOOD CONDITION
HE WAS RECOVERED EARLIER THI
MORNING BY SPECIAL OPERATION
FORCES WHICH WENT TO A
RENDEZVOUS POINT WHERE THEY ME
A GROUP OF TALIBAN THAT WERE
HOLDING HIM AND THEY HANDED HI
OVER WITHOUT INCIDENT.
>> WHAT WAS THAT MEETING LIK
BETWEEN HIM AND THE SOLDIERS
>> WE DON'T HAVE A LOT O
DETAILS AT THIS POINT ABOUT WHAT
THAT MEETING WAS LIKE.
IT WAS BROKERED BY QATA
WHICH HAS BEEN ACTING AS A
INTERMEDIARY BETWEEN THE U.S
AND THE TALIBAN IN THI
EXCHANGE
SO THEY JUST LITERALLY FLEW IN
IT'S A POINT THEY AGREED TO MEET
IN EASTERN AFGHANISTAN
THE AMERICAN SPECIAL OPERATION
FORCES WERE ON HELICOPTERS AND
CAME INTO THAT AREA, MET THE
TALIBAN, TOOK BERGDAHL, BROUGH
HIM ON THE HELICOPTER AND TOOK
HIM TO A U.S. BASE FOR
EVALUATION
>> THERE WAS SOMETHING ABOUT HIM
SCRIBBLING SOMETHING ON A PAPE
PLATE.
WHAT'S THAT ABOUT?
>> HE WASN'T SURE -- HE WASN'T
SURE WHO HAD HIM
SO HE WAS ASKING IF THAT WAS
AMERICAN SPECIAL FORCES, AND T
WHICH ONE OF THE MEMBERS OF TH
SPECIAL FORCES TEAM RESPONDE
THAT YES, IT WAS
>> SO HOW UNPRECEDENTED IS SUC
A NEGOTIATION?
THE ADMINISTRATION AND SEVERAL
PEOPLE HAVE COME OUT AND PUT OUT
STATEMENTS SAYING THIS WAS A
LONG TIME COMING
>> RIGHT
WELL, THE AMERICANS HAD TRIED TO
INITIATE TALKS WITH THE TALIBA
DIRECTLY BACK IN 2011 AND 2012
AND THOSE BROKE DOWN
SINCE THEN, THE AMERICANS HAVE
HAD NO DIRECT CONTACT WITH THE
TALIBAN.
THERE WAS AN ATTEMPT LAST SUMMER
TO TRY TO OPEN A TALIBAN
POLITICAL OFFICE IN QATAR AN
ALMOST IMMEDIATELY AFTER I
OPENED, IT WAS CLOSED DOWN AND
KIND OF AN EMBARRASSING MOMENT
INVOLVING THE TALIBAN RAISING
FLAG THAT INFURIATED THE
GOVERNMENT IN KABUL.
SINCE THEN, IT LOOKED LIKE TALKS
WERE GOING NOWHERE UNTIL
NOVEMBER OF LAST YEAR, WHEN TH
TALIBAN INDICATED, AGAIN THROUGH
QATAR, THAT THEY WER
INTERESTED IN HAVING RENEWED
NEGOTIATIONS, BUT NARROWLY
FOCUSED, JUST ON THE FATE OF
BERGDAHL
FIVE TALIBAN AFGHAN DETAINEES IN
CUBA AS WELL
THAT'S REALLY WHERE IT BECAME
FAST-TRACK
YOU HAD A VIDEO THAT WAS
RELEASED BY THE TALIBAN WHIC
WAS CONSIDERED BY THE U.S. TO BE
A GOOD WILL GESTURE AND A SIGN
BERGDAHL WAS SAFE.
>> BRIEFLY, WHAT DO WE KNO
ABOUT THE DETAINEES?
>> WELL, DEPENDING ON WHO YO
TALK TO, JOHN McCAIN HAS
IDENTIFIED THEM AS TERRORIST
WITH BLOOD ON THEIR HANDS.
U.S. OFFICIALS DOWN PLAY THEIR
FUTURE THREAT THAT THE
REPRESENT TO THE U.S
UNDER THE TERMS OF THE AGREEMENT
WITH QATAR, THEY'LL BE REQUIRE
TO SAY IN QATAR FOR A PERIOD O
AT LEAST ONE YEAR.
EFFECTIVELY, QATAR HAS AGREE
TO MONITOR THEM AND MAKE SUR
THEY DON'T RE-ENTER THE FIGHT.
>> ALL RIGHT, ADAM, THANKS S
MUCH
>> THANK YOU
>>> DEFENSE SECRETARY CHUC
HAGEL SPARRED WITH HIS CHINESE
COUNTERPART SAYING CHINA'S MOV
TO CONTROL TERRITORY INNIES ASIA
ARE DESTABILIZING THE REGION AND
UNDERMINING PEACE.
HAGEL SAID THE U.S. DOES NOT
MAKE A POSITION ON COMPETING
CLAIMS BETWEEN CHINA AND ITS
NEIGHBORS.
>> WE FIRMLY OPPOSE ANY NATION
USE OF INTIMIDATION, COERCION,
OR THE THREAT OF FORCE TO ASSERT
THOSE CLAIMS
THE UNITED STATES WILL NOT LOO
THE OTHER WAY WHEN FUNDAMENTAL
PRINCIPLES OF THE INTERNATIONA
ORDER ARE BEING CHALLENGED
>> HAGEL ALSO CRITICIZED CHINA
FOR ITS CONTINUING CYBER
SNOOPING EFFORT.
A CHINESE MILITARY OFFICIA
CALLED HAGEL'S ACCUSATIONS
GROUNDLESS, BUT THAT H
APPRECIATED HAGEL'S CANDOR
>>> THE PALESTINIAN PRESIDEN
HAS SAID THE FORMATION OF A NE
UNITY GOVERNMENT WILL BE
ANNOUNCED MONDAY, BACKED B
HAMAS AND FATAH.
HAMAS IS CONSIDERED A TERRORIS
ORGANIZATION BY BOTH ISRAEL AN
THE WEST
HE TOLD FRENCH ACTIVISTS THA
ISRAEL HAS CLAIMED IT WILL NOT
RECOGNIZE SUCH A GOVERNMENT.
>>> IN UKRAINE, CLASHE
CONTINUE
THIS WEEK, THE ORGANIZATION FO
THE SECURITY AND COOPERATION I
EUROPE LOST CONTACT WITH FIV
MONITORS AND THE HEAD OF THE OSC
SAID THE MISSION MAY HAVE TO
WITHDRAW DUE TO SAFETY CONCERNS.
THE RUSSIAN MINISTRY ISSUED
STATEMENT TODAY UNDERSCORING THE
IMPORTANCE OF HAVING
INTERNATIONAL MONITORS IN UKRAIN
AMID ONGOING TURMOIL BETWEEN THE
GOVERNMENT AND THE MILITIA
MEMBERS WHO WANT THE REGION TO
REJOIN RUSSIA.
THIS PAST WEEK, A HELICOPTER WAS
SHOT DOWN, KILLING A TOP GENERAL
AND A DOZEN SOLDIERS
WE'RE JOINED BY SABRINA OF THE
"NEW YORK TIMES.
YOU'VE BEEN IN THE BORDER REGION
BETWEEN ON THE EASTERN SIDE OF
THE COUNTRY, THE UKRAINE STORY
HAS SLID OFF THE FRONT PAGES
WHAT'S THE SITUATION ON TH
GROUND NOW
>> IT'S VERY INTERESTING
ON THE GROUND, I THINK, FOR
LONG TIME, EVERYBODY WAS
ASSUMING THAT PUTIN WAS GOING TO
KIND OF ROLL ACROSS THE BORDER
THERE WAS GOING TO BE
CRIMEA-STYLE TAKEOVER.
BUT INSTEAD WHAT WE'RE SEEING ON
THE GROUND IS VERY SORT OF
SUBTLE, ESSENTIALLY ON THE
GROUND FACTS THAT SPEAK VERY
MUCH TO RUSSIAN INVOLVEMENT, BUT
PERHAPS NOT KREMLIN INVOLVEMENT.
>> NATO SAID THERE HAS BEE
SIGNIFICANT PULLBACKS FROM
RUSSIAN FORCES OFF THE BORDER,
BUT YOU'RE SAYING THERE'S QUIT
A FEW PEOPLE WHO MIGHT BE ARME
OR BEING SUPPLIED BY RUSSI
STILL IN THAT REGION
>> WELL, AGAIN, IT'S A VERY FINE
DISTINCTION.
SO IT'S NOT THE KREMLIN, O
MOSCOW, BUT IT'S A LOT OF SORT
OF PEOPLE WITH RUSSIAN PASSPORTS
COMING TO UKRAINE TO FIGHT
WE WERE IN THE BORDER REGION
TODAY OF LUGANSK AND SAW STRON
REBEL ACTIVITY
ESSENTIALLY IT'S ITS OWN COUNTRY
OUT THERE.
THERE'S AN ASSUMPTION THAT A LOT
OF WHAT'S COMING THROUGH I
COMING THROUGH EXACTLY THA
AREA, THAT'S THE ROUTE LINE, I
YOU WILL
>> SO THAT REGION HARDLY HAD
ANYBODY VOTING, QUITE A FE
PEOPLE WERE INTIMIDATED, KEP
AWAY FROM THE POLLS.
AND SO DO WE HAVE A DE FACTO
DIVIDED UKRAINE, AND HOW DOE
THE PRESIDENT MOVE FORWARD -
THE NEW PRESIDENT MOVE FORWARD
WITH THIS?
>> YOU KNOW, I THINK IT'S VERY
DIFFICULT.
I THINK THAT BASICALLY IN A WAY,
THAT THE SORT OF RUSSIA AN
RUSSIANS ARE TRYING TO SORT OF
CREATE FACTS ON THE GROUND B
HAVING A LOT OF THESE FIGHTERS
COME IN, YOU KNOW, SOME OF THE
ARE MERCENARIES FROM THE CAULKAS
US, THEY'RE A MOTLEY CRUE OF
PEOPLE OUT THERE WITH RUSSIA
PASSPORTS.
THAT GIVES PRESIDENT PUTIN QUITE
A SERIOUS BARGAINING CHIP, A
TYPE OF SECURITY DEPOSIT THA
ALLOWS HIM TO KEEP RUSSIAN
INFLUENCE OVER UKRAINE
GIVES HIM A GOOD BARGAININ
POSITION OVER THE NEW PRESIDENT.
>> ALL RIGHT, SABRINA, THANKS SO
MUCH
>> THANK YOU
>>> SUDANESE OFFICIALS HAVE TOLD
THE BBC THEY WILL FREE THE
MOTHER WHO WAS SENTENCED T
DEATH FOR FAILING TO RENOUNC
HER CHRISTIAN FAITH.
HER FATHER WAS MUSLIM, BUT SHE
WAS RAISED BY HER CHRISTIA
MOTHER
UNDER SUDANESE LAW, CHILDREN
MUST BELONG TO THE RELIGION OF
THEIR FATHERS.
SHE GAVE BIRTH ON WEDNESDA
WHILE IN SHACKLES.
HER EXECUTION WAS DELAYED FO
TWO YEARS, SO SHE COULD BREAST
FEED HER NEW BORN BABY
SHE'S MARRIED TO A CHRISTIAN
AMERICAN MAN
THE CASE HAS BEEN THE SUBJECT OF
INTERNATIONAL PRESSURE FRO
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATION AN
CRITICISM BY THE US STAT
DEPARTMENTS AND OTHER WESTER
GOVERNMENTS.
ACCORDING TO SUDANES
AUTHORITIES, SHE WILL BE
RELEASED IN A FEW DAYS' TIME
>>> OFFICIALS IN INDIA HAV
ARRESTED FIVE PEOPLE I
CONNECTION WITH THE GANG RAP
AND MURDER OF TWO TEENAGE GIRLS.
THE GIRLS WERE FOUND O
WEDNESDAY AND TWO POLICE
OFFICERS ARE IN CUSTODY.
ACCORDING TO POLICE, THE OTHER
THREE MEN ARRESTED ARE COUSINS
FROM AN EXTENDED FAMILY.
ACTIVISTS GATHERED AT THE HOME
OF THE GIRLS TODAY WITH MANY
DEMANDING THE DEATH PENALTY FO
THOSE INVOLVED, AND DOZENS
GATHERED IN NEW DELHI THIS
EVENING IN A CANDLE LIGHT VI
TOIL PROTEST THE VIOLENCE.
MANY OF THE RAPES OCCUR WHEN
WOMEN RELIEVE THEMSELVES IN TH
FIELDS, BECAUSE THEY LAC
TOILETS IN THEIR HOMES
>>> THIS MORNING PRESIDENT OBAMA
DELIVERED HIS RADIO ADDRESS FROM
CHILDREN'S NATIONAL MEDICA
CENTER IN WASHINGTON, D.C. WHERE
HE WAS VISITING CHILDREN TREATED
FOR ASTHMA AND BREATHING
PROBLEMS
HE HIGHLIGHTED THE EFFORT OF THE
EPA TO DRAW UP GUIDELINES FO
REDUCING CARBON EMISSIONS.
>> THIS WEEK, WE'RE UNVEILIN
GLINDS TO CUT DOWN ON CARBON
POLLUTION, SMOG, AND SOOT THAT
THREATEN THE HEALTH OF THE MOS
VULNERABLE AMERICANS, INCLUDIN
CHILDREN AND THE ELDERLY
>> THE REPUBLICAN RESPONSE CAM
FROM SEN. ENZI FROM WYOMING.
>> THE ADMINISTRATION HAS SE
OUT TO KILL COAL AND ITS 800,000
JOBS
IF IT SUCCEEDS IN DEATH BY
REGULATION, WE'LL ALL BE PAYIN
A LOT MORE MONEY FOR
ELECTRICITY.
THE GUIDELINES ARE DUE TO BE
ANNOUNCED MONDAY
>>> A NEWLY RELEASED REPORT BY
U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDE
PROTECTION, SUGGESTS THAT BORDER
AGENTS USE EXCESSIVE FORCE
AGAINST ROCK THROWERS AND STOO
IN THE WAY OF FLEEING VEHICLES
TO JUSTIFY THE USE OF DEADLY
FORCE ALONG THE U.S. BORDER WITH
MEXICO
THE AGENCY WHICH DECLINED TO
MAKE THE REPORT PUBLIC, ALSO
RELEASED A HAND BOOK OUTLINING
NEW, MORE RESTRICTIVE GUIDELINES
ON WHEN AND HOW BORDER AGENT
SHOULD USE FORCE
>>> THE LOS ANGELES TIMES IS
REPORTING THAT SANTA BARBARA
SHERIFF'S DEPUTIES DID NOT KNO
ELLIOT RODGER WAS IN POSSESSIO
OF ANY WEAPONS DURING THE THRE
SEPARATE TIMES THEY INTERACTED
WITH HIM IN THE LAST YEAR.
LAST FRIDAY HE WENT ON A RAMPAGE
KILLING SIX AND WOUNDING 1
BEFORE TURNING THE GUN O
HIMSELF.
ALL OF THIS AS OFFICIALS TRY T
PIECE TOGETHER WHY RODGER ACTE
THE WAY HE DID
AND VICTIMS' FAMILIES WONDER I
THE TRAGEDY MIGHT HAVE BEE
PREVENTED.
AS MILES O'BRIAN REPORTS
SCIENTISTS TOO ARE EXPLORING
WHAT MAY BE HAPPENING IN THE
MIND OF RAMPAGE KILLERS.
THIS STORY AIRED LAST YEAR, PART
OF A SPECIAL FOLLOWING THE
NEWTOWN SHOOTINGS.
>> ANDY WAS ALWAYS REAL PLAYFUL.
>> THERE YOU GO.
>> YES
>> HE WAS A REAL KIND KID.
>> HI, DADDY
>> HOW DID THIS SWEET KID IN THE
HOME MOVIES BECOME THE MURDE
SUSPECT ON THE 6:00 NEWS
>> AS YOU SAID, MOSTLY STUDENT
AND PARENTS MEETING UP WITH ON
ANOTHER.
AND I'M SURE, SO SHOCKED THA
THEY JUST WANT TO SEE WHIC
OTHER FRIENDS ARE OUT THERE.
>> WHAT MADE ANDY WILLIAMS, THEN
15, WALK INTO A BOYS ROOM AN
OPEN FIRE ON HIS SCHOOLMATES
KILLING TWO, AND INJURING 13
>> THIS ONE, I THINK IS, EIGHT
GRADE.
>> HIS FATHER JEFF IS HAUNTED BY
THE QUESTION
>> SO HE WASN'T A KID THAT WAS
INFATUATED WITH VIOLENCE
>> NO.
NOT AT ALL
HE WAS A SILLY CLOWN
YOU DON'T EXPECT A SILLY CLOWN
TO DO SOMETHING LIKE THIS, TO GO
KILL PEOPLE.
>> CLASS CLOWN
>> THE CLASS CLOWN, TO BE TH
CLASS KILLER
>> THE MIND OF A RAMPAGE KILLE
CAN LIVE BEHIND THE FACE OF TH
BOY NEXT DOOR.
CAN SCIENCE SHED ANY LIGHT I
THESE DARKEST OF DARK PLACES
NOT MUCH DATA TO GO ON
FROM COLUMBINE THROUGH NEWTOWN
IN MOST CASES, THE SHOOTER END
UP DEAD, BY HIS OWN HAND OR BY
POLICE
BUT ANDY WILLIAMS IS ONE OF TH
FEW LIVING SCHOOL RAMPAG
SHOOTERS
>> THIS IS FROM AN INMATE AT A
CALIFORNIA CORRECTIONA
FACILITY
>> HE CALLED ME COLLECT FROM A
PAYPHONE INSIDE THE PRISON I
THE MIDDLE OF THE SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA DESERT.
ANDY WILLIAMS IS NOW 27.
HE'S SPENT 12 YEARS BEHIND BARS.
TAKE US BACK TO THAT MOMENT, AND
IF YOU CAN TELL US WHAT WA
GOING ON IN YOUR MIND AT THE
TIME, THAT WOULD REALLY HELP US.
>> TO ME, IT WAS JUST LIKE
ENOUGH AT THE TIME
AT 15, I DIDN'T REALLY THINK
LIKE ALL THAT STUFF THROUGH.
I DIDN'T THINK TWO PEOPLE WERE
GOING TO DIE OR 13 PEOPLE WERE
GOING TO GET SHOT.
I THOUGHT I WOULD MAKE A LOT O
NOISE AND THE COPS WOULD SHO
UP
>> COUNTY ALL-STAR TEAM THAT H
WAS ON FOR BASEBALL.
>> HE WAS A GOOD BASEBAL
PLAYER, HUH?
ANDY MOVED FROM MARYLAND WIT
HIS DAD AFTER HIS PARENT
DIVORCED
HE WAS THE NEW KID AT SCHOOL AND
EVEN THE BOYS THAT ACCEPTED HIM,
BULLIED HIM UNMERCIFULLY
SO HE WAS REALLY GOING THROUGH
HELL
>> NEW KID AND BEING TORMENTED
BY THE OLDER KIDS THERE.
>> WHAT DO WE GOT?
>> WE'RE GETTING BUZZED OFF OF
IT
>> ANDY STARTED DRINKING
SMOKING POT AND TAKING
PRESCRIPTION PAINKILLERS
ANDY HAD ACCESS TO A GUN
HE BOASTED TO HIS FRIENDS THAT
HE WAS PLANNING THE RAMPAGE.
>> IT'S A VOLATILE MIX, BU
SADLY A COMMON ONE
SO WHAT SEPARATES A RAMPAG
KILLER FROM OTHER STRUGGLING
TEENS?
IS IT GENETICS OR SOMETHING IN
THEIR ENVIRONMENT?
JOSH BUCKLES IS A HARVARD NEUR
SCIENTIST SEARCHING FOR TH
BIOLOGICAL ROOTS OF VIOLEN
BEHAVIOR
>> ONE OF THE MOST INFURIATING
THINGS AS A SCIENTIST AND
PERSON, IS THIS ATTEMPT TO TRY
TO FIND SOME DIAGNOSTIC LABEL,
SOME DIAGNOSTIC BOX TO PUT THI
PERSON INTO AND EXPLAIN WHY THEY
DID THIS TERRIBLE, TERRIBL
THING.
>> BUT AS RESEARCHERS PEER INT
THE BRAINS OF CRIMINALS WITH
MRIs, THEY'RE FINDING FAULTY
WIRING
ONE OF THE CIRCUITS IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR HIGHER LEVEL
THINKING WITH THE EMOTION CENTER
WHICH GOES INTO OVERDRIVE WHEN
THE THREAT IS PERCEIVED.
IF THE THREAT IS NOT REAL, A
MESSAGE IS SENT TO CALM DOWN
BUT IF THE WIRING IS FAULTY,
THAT CALMING MESSAGE MAY NOT GET
THROUGH.
>> IN THOSE FOLKS, IT SEEM
THEY'RE MORE LIKELY TO RESPOND
WITH GREAT ACTIVITY AN
EMOTIONAL AROUSAL WHEN THE
THINK THEY'RE FACED WITH SOM
KIND OF THREAT
>> EVEN IN PERFECTLY HEALTHY
BRAINS, THE PREFRONTAL KORTEX IS
NOT FULLY DEVELOPED IN THE
TEENAGE YEARS.
BUT THE EMIG DALA IS, ONE REASON
WHY TEENS TEND TO HAVE BIGGE
EMOTIONAL SWINGS
NOW IMAGINE A TEEN WITH TH
EARLY STAGES OF MENTAL ILLNESS
>> THEY ARE PEOPLE WHOSE MENTA
CONDITIONS CAUSE THEM TO AMPLIFY
THE SOCIAL SLIGHTS THAT HAPPEN
ALL THE TIME IN HIGH SCHOOL.
>> A -- SO THESE ARE KIDS WH
ARE DESPERATE TO BE ACCEPTED
NOT LONERS
THEY ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE TRYING
TO JOIN GROUPS ALL THE TIME.
BUT THEIR EXPERIENCE EVERY DAY
IS FRICTION.
IT NEVER WORKS
>> DID YOU FEEL SUICIDAL
>> ABSOLUTELY.
IT WAS LIKE AN EIGHT-MONTH
CONSTANT, LIKE, I WONDER I
THINGS WOULD BE BETTER IF, IF
WASN'T IN THIS CITY, IN THIS
STATE, LIKE, OR EVEN ON THIS
EARTH?
SO IN MY GRAND SCHEME, MY GRAN
PLAN WAS -
>> ANDY PLANNED A SO-CALLE
SUICIDE BY COP, EXPECTING TH
AUTHORITIES TO GUN HIM DOWN.
BUT HE HAD A CHANGE OF HEART A
THE LAST MINUTE, DROPPED THE
REVOLVER AND SURRENDERED
RESEARCHERS SAY 50% OF RAMPAGE
SHOOTERS ARE SUICIDAL BEFORE THE
CARNAGE.
>> WE'RE LOOKING AT WHAT'S
DIFFERENT ABOUT THOSE PEOPLE
ONE OF THE THINGS WE FEE
CONFIDENT ABOUT IS THAT THERE IS
SOMETHING DIFFERENT ABOUT THOS
PEOPLE
IT'S NOT JUST A FEATURE OF
DEPRESSION
>> TAKE YOUR THREE FINGERS, PU
IT ON THE BUTTON
ONE, TWO, THREE, STAND FOR YOU
RESPONSE
>> HE BELIEVES ONE FUNDAMENTAL
DIFFERENCE MAY SHOW UP IN
DECEPTIVELY SIMPLE TEST, WHICH
HE LET ME TRY.
>> GO THROUGH THE SET AS QUICKLY
AS YOU CAN
>> IT'S CALLED A STROOP TEST
DEVELOPED BY JOHN RIDLEY STROO
IN THE 1930s
SOUNDS SIMPLE.
ALL I HAD TO DO WAS IDENTIFY THE
COLOR I SAW ON THE SCREEN.
>> GOSH, THIS IS HARDER THAN YOU
THINK.
>> YOU NOTICE RIGHT AWAY HOW YOU
SLOW DOWN.
>> OH, YEAH.
I DON'T KNOW WHY
THIS SHOULDN'T BE THAT HARD.
WHY IS THAT?
>> THAT WAS STROOP'S BIG
DISCOVERY.
>> KELP HAD TWO GROUPS OF PEOPLE
COMPLETE STROOP TESTS WHIL
THEIR BRAINS WERE IN AN MRI.
ONE GROUP WAS DEPRESSED.
SOME HAD ATTEMPTED SUICIDE
AND THE OTHER WAS HEALTHY.
HE NOTICED A SURPRISIN
DIFFERENCE IN THEIR BRAIN SCANS.
THESE ARE HEALTHY BRAINS DOING
THE STROOP TEST.
THE RED SHOW DECREASE BLOO
FLOW
NOW LOOK AT THE BRAINS O
DEPRESSED, SUICIDAL PEOPLE DOING
THE SAME TEST.
>> THAT'S VERY DRAMATIC.
>> KELP SAYS THEIR BRAINS SEEM
INCLINED TO FOCUS ON ONE THING
IN THIS CASE, THE WORD, NOT TH
COLOR, AND ARE LESS FLEXIBLE
IT MAY MEAN THEIR BRAINS ARE
WIRED IN A WAY THAT MAKES THEM
FIXATE ON SUICIDAL THOUGHTS.
RESEARCH LIKE THIS MAY TAK
SCIENTISTS CLOSER TO A MEANS O
SCREENING FOR SUICIDAL
TENDENCIES
ESPECIALLY IN ADOLESCENTS WH
WOULD NEVER ADMIT TO IT, LIK
ANDY WILLIAMS.
BUT THE QUESTION REMAINS, WH
DOES SOMEONE WHO WANTS TO EN
HIS OWN LIFE WANT TO TAKE SO
MANY OTHERS WITH HIM
>> YOU'RE LOOKING FOR A WAY TO
CHANGE THIS TERRIBLE SOCIA
REPUTATION YOU HAVE AS A LOSER
AND YOU LAND ON THE IDEA O
SHOOTING PEOPLE, AFTER MAN
OTHER FAILED ATTEMPTS TO CHANG
YOUR SOCIAL REPUTATION
>> GOOD EVENING, LADIES AN
GENTLEMEN.
>> OFTEN RAMPAGE SHOOTERS CAST
THEMSELVES AS A HOLLYWOO
VILLAIN, THE ANTI-HERO, TH
SHOOTER WHO OPENED FIRE IN A
MOVIE THEATER IN AURORA,
COLORADO, WAS INFATUATED FRO
THE JOKER IN THE BATMAN MOVIES
>> THE ANTI-HERO IS A RESPECTE
CHARACTER, RESPECTED THROUGH
FEAR
AND THAT FEELS A LOT BETTER TO
THEM THAN DISMISSED, BELITTLED
INSIGNIFICANT.
>> BETTER TO BE INFAMOUS THA
IRRELEVANT
INVISIBLE.
>> JEFF WILLIAMS HAD NO IDEA A
RAMPAGE KILLER WAS UNDER HIS
ROOF
>> WHY WERE YOU HOLDING BACK
FROM YOUR FATHER
>> I DON'T KNOW, MAN
I THINK I WAS ASHAMED TO FRONT
MY FAILURES.
>> DO YOU LOVE YOUR SON?
>> YES, I LOVE MY SON VERY MUCH.
I DO NOT CONDONE WHAT HE DID
THE WAY HE WENT ABOUT TRYING T
RESOLVE HIS ISSUES WHATSOEVER.
HE MADE A VERY BAD CHOICE.
I CAN'T CHANGE THAT.
>> RESEARCH MAY NEVER GIVE US AN
EASY WAY TO IDENTIFY A FUTUR
RAMPAGE KILLER, BUT IT HAS
PROVEN THE ROOTS OF A RAMPAG
RUN DEEP, AND THERE ARE MANY
INGREDIENTS IN THE MIX LON
BEFORE THE CARNAGE
IF ONLY WE WERE BETTER AT SEEING
THE SIGNS OF TROUBLE
>> LISTEN TO MILES O’BRIAN'
FULL INTERVIEW WITH CONVICTE
KILLER ANDY WILLIAMS AND SEE HIS
CONVERSATION WITH THE AUTHOR O
THE BLOG POST, I AM ADAM LANZA'S
MOTHER
>> THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS "NEWS HOUR WEEKEND."
THANKS FOR WATCHING.